Active exploration for oil in Mesozoic reservoirs in SE Mexico area began during the 1960s, encouraged by abundant oil seeps along the front of the Sierra de Chiapas .
This led to the discovery of oil in Lower Cretaceous dolomite reservoirs at the Cerro de Nachital field in the S part of the Isthmus Saline Basin.
Although several subsequent wells drilled to Mesozoic targets in the Sierra de Chiapas province and on the Yucatan Peninsula were not productive, the stratigraphic information gained led to the identification of Cretaceous reef and backreef facies, similar to those of 'Golden Lane'.
An active geophysical exploration program was subsequently undertaken further N in the coastal plain area , near Villahermosa, Tabasco state and, in 1969-70, in the offshore Campeche area.
Subsequent drilling in the Reforma area led to the discovery of the Sitio Grande and Cactus oil fields in 1972, producing from Cretaceous Sierra Madre Limestone reservoirs .
The exploration success in onshore SE Mexico prompted studies to investigate the extension of the Late Jurassic and Cretaceous shelf margin northward into the offshore Gulf of Campeche.
A large number of favorable structures were identified by hydrocarbon seeps and 2-D seismic in the offshore Campeche region in the late 1960s and early 1970s.
In 1976, the Chac-1 well was drilled to Jurassic carbonates and shales, producing oil at a rate of 952 BOPD and gas from a dolomite breccia reservoir considered to be of Paleocene age .
The Cantarell-1 well was drilled in 1977 in the nearby Akal block and produced oil and gas from the same horizon.
Subsequent appraisal led to the discovery of oil in the adjacent Nohoch structure , and in 1979, the 32+ BBO STOUP Cantarell Complex went onstream .
During this period, in 1977-79, the Ixtoc Field and the Ku-Maloob-Zaap Complex were discovered on the Campeche shelf in the same Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary breccia, which was later named the Cantarell Formation and assigned an Upper Cretaceous age .
In 1980, oil was discovered in Oxfordian sandstones in the Ek-Balam Field .
Continued exploration for the Cantarell Formation breccia play along the Campeche shelf edge led to the discoveries in 1979-84 of the Abkatun-Pol-Chuc field complex and of the Caan Field in the Gulf of Campeche .
The first well on the Abkatun Field, Abkatun-1, was spudded in 1977, —20 km southwest of the Cantarell Complex.
Its primary target was the Upper Jurassic, based upon information derived from the Chac-1 well and the nearby Akal-3 well.
Drilling was suspended at a depth of 700 m due to a blowout and fire when gas was encountered.
Redrill well Abkatun-1A eventually discovered oil in the Cantarell Formation breccia in 1979.
Sidetrack well Abkatun-1B, drilled in 1980, produced at an initial rate of 2170 BOPD and 1840 MCFGPD.
Follow-up discoveries included the nearby Pol Field in 1980 and the Chuc Field in 1982, which are located over domal structures similar to that of the Abkatun Field.
The area was later covered by a 3-D seismic survey .
The Abkatun Field came onstream in 1980, followed by the Pol Field in 1981 and the Chuc Field in 1983.
Basin Evolution and Petroleum Systems The Abkatun Field lies in water depths of —40 m on the Campeche Shelf, in the S part of the Gulf of Mexico, along the western flank of the Yucatan platform .
The Campeche Shelf is an offshore extension of the fault-bounded Comalcalco Basin and Villahermosa Uplift that lie on the coastal plain in front of mountains comprising the Sierra de Chiapas and Chiapas Massif .
The Campeche Shelf drops abruptly to the W, into the Campeche submarine canyon at —200 m water depth and is bounded by the main scarp of the Yucatan Platform to the N.
The overall structure is that of a shelf tilted toward the W and cut by N-trending normal faults formed during the Early .